It’s a key to meeting our goal of a 90 percent graduation rate by 2025.
Money alone won’t help us meet our goals. We must understand that not every student is headed towards a four-year college degree. But if we arm students with marketable, in-demand skills, and a plan to use them, we light the path toward graduation and a good job.
High-wage, high-demand jobs with advancement potential.
Jobs that help our families get ahead.
Jobs that open the door to a better life. 
These are the kinds of plans that turn learners into earners.
Not just through high school, but into the next stage of a worker’s career.
Most of our grandparents – or even our parents – took a job as a young person and stayed in that job or with that company until retirement.
My mom had it a bit easier than my dad. Her parents, my granny and grandpa, married young. She was nineteen; he was twenty. They eloped and got married at the county courthouse in Tulsa, Oklahoma. They were married for over 75 years, until my granny passed away at 96. 
My grandpa didn’t go to college, but shortly after high school, he started working at a food distributor called the Nash Finch company. He started in the warehouse. Over the years he worked hard. He eventually earned a really good salary. They were able to raise my mom and my uncle Jon and send them both to college. He was extremely dedicated to that company. When he retired at 65, they threw him a party and gave him a plaque.
He lived to be 100 on the pension he accrued over a lifetime of work.
The days of getting a job and keeping it for a lifetime are over.
Today’s graduates are likely to change jobs about every three years. This current generation of workers will change careers – not just jobs, but careers – seven times over the course of their adult lives.
We must build new pathways from the first job someone takes to their last. Pathways that ensure hardworking Oregonians can develop cutting-edge skills that give our state an economic advantage.
Pathways that include skill training and registered apprenticeships to make Oregonians the first choice for high-wage, high-demand jobs. 
Jobs that buy groceries. 
Jobs that pay the rent. 
Jobs that help save for retirement. 
Over the course of the next year, through a series of executive actions, policy positions, and legislation, Future Ready Oregon will build these pathways for adults to get the right skills for the right jobs of Oregon’s future. 
I want each and every one of you to join me in taking five steps towards strengthening Oregon’s workforce.
First, we have to change the way the state makes investments so that they are equitable across Oregon. To build pathways for lifelong learners as they advance throughout their careers. That’s why I have realigned Business Oregon’s priorities to focus on work that impacts communities of color and Rural Oregon, including Oregon’s nine tribes.
As an example, we are now investing in broadband and prioritizing infrastructure investments to increase competitiveness of Oregon’s rural industries. We are also providing incentives to businesses to expand apprenticeships and job training opportunities for limited-English speakers and underserved communities. 
We are working with the Higher Education Coordinating Commission and Business Oregon to improve coordination between high-growth industries and our job training programs. Our community colleges are a key component of this work as well.
As we work together with industries across the state, we can take the second step and fuel growth with what I am calling “Next-Gen Apprenticeships.” These are training programs in technical fields like IT, healthcare, advanced wood manufacturing, and high-tech manufacturing. 
Next-Gen Apprenticeships will expand registered apprenticeship opportunities to give hardworking Oregonians a competitive edge, ensuring they have the skills for today’s technologies and tomorrow’s advancements.
This is happening right now in Bend and Eugene. The program is called Apprenti. It’s just getting started, but already job seekers are flocking to the program. Businesses are excited, too.
Third, we must also work to turn wage earners into job creators. 
I have proposed a bill this session that directs Business Oregon to develop a loan program to help those who are skilled in the construction industry start their own businesses. They are only eligible for these loans if they work on affordable housing  in our rural communities. And that means these businesses will open where jobs are needed the most: rural Oregon. 
In all of our communities, even if someone is qualified for a job, they may not be able to live near it. It can be just as difficult to find housing in Pendleton as it is in Portland. 
This is a major threat to our continued growth and economic prosperity. 
That’s why I’m taking the fourth step towards making Future Ready Oregon a reality. I have directed my Regional Solutions team to partner with local communities, the business sector, and private developers to address the housing shortage for working families in Oregon. 
Several pilot projects, selected from dozens of proposals, will be announced in the coming weeks. From these, we’ll learn what can be scaled up and replicated.
We also need to build on the success of the industries that have the highest rate of return. One of our largest growing industries is healthcare. Those training to enter the field should have fewer hoops to jump through and a wider range of opportunities to earn a good wage to support their families.
In the fifth step, I will work to better align training and requirements for entry-level jobs in health care, in-home care, and community-based health to ensure that there is a ladder to a career for people gaining skills in caregiving. 
Strategic investments in these key sectors and in specific regions of the state will spark job growth and fuel our economy. 
Giving our students hands-on learning opportunities – and once they graduate, supporting them as lifelong learners – is the beginning of Future Ready Oregon. 
It is a new way of thinking about our economy and the Oregonians who work in it.
By working together, we can ensure that economic prosperity reaches every single corner of the state. 
Everyone deserves the chance my family had – to get a good education.
To work hard.
To have the opportunity to build a better life.
I stand before you today on the shoulders of my grandparents and parents who worked hard to create a path for me to get here. 
Each of us stands on the shoulders of those who came before us.
We are the next generation who stepped forward to say, “Oregon is my home. This is my community; these are my neighbors – our children are the future of this state. And I have a responsibility to try to make things better.”
It is fitting that we sit in this chamber to consider the future of Oregon that we will help shape, together. 
 We know how to rise above our differences. To put Oregon before party. To put Oregonians first. 
Just last session, Senator Boquist, Senator Beyer, Representative McKeown and now Senator Bentz played critical roles in passage of the transportation package that will create jobs and make our roads and bridges safer.
Senator Knopp and Senator Taylor helped pass pay equity and fair scheduling, the first of its kind in the country.
Representative Rayfield and Senator Jackie Winters worked hard to fund health care.
And, after we experienced devastating wildfires this summer, I am very grateful to Rep. David Brock Smith – and to all of you who represent districts impacted by fire and smoke, who continue to be strong advocates for recovery.
This Legislature is more diverse than ever – and a more accurate representation of our state. This diversity is a major asset; it means more Oregon voices and experiences and communities are represented at the decision-making table. And this is a very good thing. 
We are at our best when we are diverse in our world views and experiences, but united in our resolve to make the well-being of the people of Oregon our highest priority.
A divided and chaotic Washington, D.C. is unworkable, but a united Oregon is unstoppable.
That’s why, under my leadership, we preserve the beauty and bounty of Oregon and continue to fight to keep our public lands in public hands.
That’s why we won’t let Washington, D.C. take healthcare away from thousands of Oregonians.
And that’s why I’ll fight to keep Oregon a welcoming place to all who call our state home – including our immigrant families and Dreamers. They embody the ideals of the American Dream and are an integral part of our communities, our culture, and our economy.
As we come together this session, let us commit to keeping our promise to Oregonians. To take responsibility for moving Oregon forward.
We must fuel our economy by closing the skills gap and and ensuring our children are school ready and our schools are strong.
We must make the PERS system more sustainable and keep the debt we owe from hobbling public education.
We must operate state government as efficiently as possible. Being careful with every single taxpayer dollar.
We must tackle the opioid crisis that threatens the ability of so many Oregonians to lead healthy and productive lives.
And we must always keep our eyes on the horizon, making sure that the next generation has opportunities to make better lives for themselves.
To give anything less than our very best effort is to waste this opportunity given to us by the people of Oregon. 
They are counting on us; we cannot let them down.
Thank you. 
